
1 & 2 Chronicles overlap a lot with Samuel-Kings in terms of the history which they cover. However, they focus on different things, and they have different perspectives.

## I. Overview of 1 & 2 Chronicles: (Often simply: "Chronicles")

* Genesis → 2 Kings forms the first account of Israel's history / of God's working with and through Israel. It begins with the account of creation, and ends with Judah going into exile.

   Chronicles is …

* In particular, Chronicles picks up at …

   and it ends with …

* In the traditional Jewish arrangement of the books of their Scriptures (= the Christian Old Testament), Chronicles is …

   So the Jewish Scriptures end with decree of Cyrus (2 Chron 36:22–23) –

   > 22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom and also put it in writing: 23 "Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, 'The LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever is among you of all his people, may the LORD his God be with him. Let him go up’."

   So the Jewish canon ends on this hopeful note: the Jews being permitted to return to Jerusalem.

## II. Chronicles ↔ Samuel-Kings

### A. They Have a Different Focus: Chronicles –

1. Picks up after the death of Saul, and clearly focuses on:

2. Focuses on …

3. Focuses on …

   and on …

4. Focuses on …

   Because after the exile, there was no king, but there was a temple; thus the temple now stood as the identifying factor of the nation of Israel.

5. Says much more about … .

### B. Chronicles and Samuel-Kings Have Different Perspectives: In general –

Sam-Kings explains: How did we get in to this mess? (= How did Judah come to be in exile?)

Chronicles ends with: But we have made it through it. (= They can now return from exile.)

Samuel-Kings: Highlights the division of kingdom and the sinfulness of the Northern Kingdom.

Chronicles: Does not elaborate on the sinfulness of the Northern Kingdom; and more often speaks of “all Israel,” recalling their underlying unity.

### C. Specific Examples of What Chronicles Added or Omitted:

SAMUEL-KINGS | CHRONICLES
:--- | :---
David's struggle to come to the throne; Joab & Abner, Ish-Bosheth, Mephibosheth. | &nbsp;
David's sin with Bathsheba. | Bathsheba who??
`Samuel-Kings records little about this. →` | David's massive preparations for the construction of the temple (eight chapters!)
The charge to Solomon (1 Kgs 9). | Records fire falling from heaven, and adds the line, "If my people, who are called by my name, will humble themselves … and pray, I will hear …"
Solomon taking thirteen years to build his own palace. | &nbsp;
Solomon's wives. | &nbsp;
&nbsp; | Hezekiah purifying the temple (2 Chron 29).
&nbsp; | Hezekiah celebrating a Passover (2 Chron 30).
&nbsp; | Those who are ceremonially unclean but who
 have set their hearts on seeking God may celebrate this Passover.
Mentions "the sins of Jeroboam" ±20x. | &nbsp;
22 chapters on Elijah & Elisha. | One verse mentions Elijah; that's it.
Manasseh is horribly evil. | True … however …
→ | Manasseh repents (!) [See 2 Chron 33]
Ends with Judah in exile. | Ends with the decree of Cyrus (King of Persia) that the Jews may return and rebuild the temple in Jerusalem.
