
### A. Two Key Items from the Beginning of the Book, Proverbs 1:1–7

* Prov 1:2-6 The nature & purpose of the book:

* Prov 1:7 A fundamental declaration of the book:


### B. Insights for Interpreting Individual Proverbs / the Book of Proverbs

1. A key insight for understanding and applying Proverbs: "proverbs" are not …

   * What proverbs are …
   * What proverbs are not …

2. Proverbs are useful reminders of what is often true, but they do not necessarily set forth
something that is true in all circumstances. Consider from the professor's culture:

   > "Absence make the heart grow fonder." ↔ "Out of sight, out of mind."

3. Not every verse in the Book of Proverbs consists of a …

   Prov. 1:6 mentions "proverbs, parables, sayings, and riddles." It also has sections which are extended exhortations. Here are some examples:

   - Chs. 1-4, and again chs. 6-9 are not classic short proverbs. Rather, …

   - Sayings: Prov. 22:17ff, + chs. 23 & 24, are explicitly labeled "the sayings of the wise." These sayings are more like direct teachings and instructions. They are close to commands. They often begin with "Do not …". Here is an example:

      22:22-23 Do not exploit the poor just because they are poor, and do not crush the needy in court, for the Lord will take up their case and will <someday> plunder those who plunder them.

   - Proverbs ↔ Riddles:

      Some proverbs are entirely self-evident:

      - 13:1 A wise son heeds his father's advice, but a mocker does not listen to rebuke.

      - 22:10 Drive out the mocker, and out goes strife; quarrels and insults are ended.

      Some proverbs require more thought to get their point.

      - 11:2 When pride comes, then comes disgrace; but with humility comes wisdom.

      - 13:24 He who spares the rod hates his son, but he who loves him is careful to discipline him.

      - 14:12 There is a way that seems right to a man,

        [=16:25] but in the end it leads to death.

      - 17:5 Whoever mocks a poor person shows contempt for his Maker; whoever gloats over disaster will not go unpunished.

      Riddles are like proverbs that you have to think about even more to get the point.

      - 26:14 A door on its hinges, and a sluggard on his bed.

      - 20:14 "Bad, Bad," says the buyer, but then he boasts.

### C. Some Examples of Proverbs that are Useful for Learning How to Interpret Proverbs:

26:4 + 26:5 (Compare how different translations render this verse.)

To Note! It is possible to misunderstand and therefore to misuse a proverb: 26:9

> "Like a thornbush in the hand of a drunkard, is a proverb in the mouth of a fool."

19:19 An example of "tough love" → "A hotheaded man …"

30:17 "The eye that scorns … ."

### D. Some Classic Proverbs:

- 12:18

   Reckless words pierce like a sword, but the tongue of the wise brings healing.

- 15:1

   A gentle answer turns away wrath, but a harsh word stirs up anger.

- 19:4

   Wealth brings many friends; but a poor man's friends desert him.

- 12:16

   A fool shows his annoyance at once, but a prudent man overlooks an insult.

- 29:11

   A fool gives full vent to his anger, but a wise man keeps himself under control.

- 14:9

   Fools mock at making amends for sin, but good will is found among the upright.
