
{% include session/youtube.html id='igcXq4oZ9S4' %}

## I. The Major Prophets – The Big Three, + One:

#### Isaiah

lived during the Divided Kingdom period; he lives through the destruction of Samaria.

Major themes:

- Chs. 1–39 refer to:
- Chs. 40–66 refer to:

#### Jeremiah

Jeremiah predicted and lived through the destruction of Jerusalem.

- He repeatedly calls Judah/Israel …

- In something of a surprise, he tells Judah to …

- He explicitly predicts that the exile will last …
-
He explicitly speaks of the …

```
Remember: The old covenant ≠ the Old Testament. The old covenant =
```

#### Ezekiel

Was taken to Babylon in the 2nd deportation (597 BC; 10 yrs. before Jerusalem fell); so he prophesied from Babylon during the exile.

The book has multiple visions, and has apocalyptic visions of the end-times.

- It opens with an extended vision of …

   Which implies what?

- It ends with an extended vision of …

#### Daniel

Daniel was taken to Babylon in the 1st deportation (605 BC); so the book (its narratives & its visions) all take place there. It has dramatic visions of the future.
 .

## II. The Three Clusters of Minor Prophets:

### A. During the Divided Kingdom = Before the Fall of Samaria:

#### Hosea

-  Noteworthy fact: God tells Hosea to …

####  Amos – Amos is often called …

- The book begins (chs. 1–3) with a cycle of judgment oracles, each of which begins with the expression:

- The expression is a rhythmic device that signals the beginning of a new oracle, and probably carries the sense, "The more I think about them, the madder I get."

- The oracles in chs. 1–3 are pronounced against the nations surrounding Judah and NK Israel, but …

#### Micah

- Explicitly predicts …
- Micah 5:2 mentions …

#### Jonah

- You know the "great fish" account; but what city was Jonah sent to? Does the city repent? How does Jonah respond?

#### Joel

- Is hard to date. [Your prof favors the divided kingdom period; others favor early post-exilic.]

- Joel has a dramatic vision of …
- He also has a vision of …

### B. During 'Judah Alone' = Before the Fall of Jerusalem:

#### Nahum

- Is written concerning the nation of …
- What other minor prophet addresses Nineveh?
- The name "Nahum" means …

#### Habakkuk

- consists of …

#### Zephaniah

- Pronounces judgment against Judah and four other nations, in the “great day of the Lord.“ But it ends with …

### C-1. A Possibly(??) Early Exilic Minor Prophet: Obadiah.

- Or, Obadiah might date to the Div. Kingdom; if so, probably ±840 BC, when Edom raided Judah.
- A noteworthy feature: the book of Obadiah is …
- The book of Obadiah is about …
- In the prophetic books, Edom / Esau sometimes seems to be used as …

### C-2. An Early Exilic Book from the "Writings": Lamentations.

- Lamentations is not(!) …

- But it is mentioned here because it is short, and is related to a prophet; the prophet …

   - Q: So what is the book of Lamentations about?
   - A: It is …

### C-3. Post-Exilic Period; Judah is now under what empire? __ .

- Haggai & Zechariah
- Both date themselves to …
- Both urge …
- Both are mentioned in …

#### Haggai

- Haggai re-iterates the general principle that …

- Haggai poses the

   Q:

   A:

#### Zechariah
 - __
 - __
 - The book of Zechariah makes a lot more sense if …

#### Malachi

 * Malachi is definitely …
 * Most of the book is a set of disputes between God and Judah.
 * Two important closing notes: Malachi 4:4
 Malachi 4:5

### Conclusion: In the post-exilic period, it is clear that …
