`Handout #01: Why Should Christians Read and Study the Old Testament?`

{% include youtube.html id='iRX_L69qM80' %}

# A. Do Christians need to read and study the Old Testament?

Some Christians have suggested that Christians do not really need to learn the Old Testament. They argue that Christians live according to the teachings of Jesus and the New Testament, so we do not need to know or follow the Old Testament.

Yes, it is true(!) that Christians should follow and live by the teachings of Jesus. And yes, there are things in the OT that many Christians do not understand, or do not know what to do with. And yes, sometimes it is not clear how the OT should apply to Christians.

But nonetheless, there are very good reasons for Christians to read and study and come to understand the Old Testament.

1. To begin with, it is necessary to know about many things in the OT in order to understand the NT.

   For example, the NT refers to Abraham, to Moses, to the Law, to David, and to the new covenant. How do we know what these things are? We know what they are because the OT tells us about them.

2. Jesus never taught that he had come to set aside the Old Testament. He never taught his followers to ignore the OT.

   Rather, Jesus views the OT as the word of God; he affirms the authority of the OT. Some examples of what Jesus said:

   - Scripture is the Word of God (Matt 15:6, Luke 11:28).
   - It is the command of God (Matt 15:3).
   - Jesus affirms that God's word is truth (John 17:17).
   - He affirms that Scriptures (which, in Jesus' time, meant the Old Testament) cannot be broken (John 10:34-35).
   - And in Matt 5:17, Jesus told us that he did not(!) come to abolish the Law, but to fulfill it.

3. The rest of the New Testament also views the OT as Scripture, as from God, as having authority, and as being useful for Christians.

   - Everything that was written in the past was written to teach us, so that through endurance and the encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope. (Rom 15:4)

   - … as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it, 15and how from infancy you have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. (2 Tim 3:14-15).

   - All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness, 17 so that the servant of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work. (2 Tim 3:16-17).

4. The NT does not re-interpret the OT; it rightly interprets the OT.

5. If there is only one God, then the God of the Old Testament is indeed the same as the God of the New Testament. If that is true, then whatever the OT teaches us about the nature and character of God remains true, because God does not change.

   In like manner, whatever the OT teaches us about the fundamental things that God desires from us remains true.

   Here are some examples:

   1 Peter 3:10-12 quotes Ps 34:12-16.

   > Whoever would love life and see good days, must keep his tongue from evil, and his speech from being deceitful. He must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it. For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and his ears are attentive to their prayer, but the face of the Lord is against those who commit evil.

   Jesus, in Matt 9:13 & 12:7, quotes Hosea 6:6.

   > For I desire mercy, not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God, rather than burnt offerings.

   Consider Micah 6:6-8.

   > 6 With what shall I come before the Lord, and bow down before the exalted God? [ … ]
   > 8 He has showed you, O man, what is good.
   > And what does the Lord require of you? To act with justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God.

   The verses just cited provide good guidance for anyone who wishes to serve God, whether during the Old Testament, or as Christians under the New Testament.

# B. Main Conclusion:

So, in general, the NT affirms that the OT is Scripture from God, that it has authority, and that it is useful for teaching Christians. Also, knowing the OT allows us to understand the NT better. Finally, whatever the OT teaches us about the nature and character of God remains true(!), because God does not change.

## However …

However, some elements in the OT do not apply to Christians directly; they do not govern us the same way they governed OT Israel.

For example, Christians no longer need to sacrifice sheep or goats or bulls to God (Heb 10:1-19). And we are no longer required to observe the food regulations that God gave OT Israel (Mark 7:19).

## When in Doubt …

When in doubt: if we are not sure what to do with an OT passage, but the NT teaching on the subject is clear, then follow the NT teaching. Do not(!) set aside clear teaching from the NT in favor of something from the OT that you are not sure what to do with.

## Question:

So how do we know what still applies to us directly, and what does not? In other handouts we will set forth guidance from the Bible itself to answer this question. Those handouts will explain what in the OT still applies to Christians directly, what does not, and why.

## A Closing Thought on the Old Testament Scriptures:

Luke 24:32 records the thoughts of the two disciples who walked with Jesus on the road to Emmaus, as he explained the Scriptures to them.

> “They asked each other, "Were not our hearts burning within us while he talked with us on the road and opened the [OT!] Scriptures to us?"

