
# A. Some Basic Facts about the Books of the Bible:

As you probably know, the two main divisions in the Bible are the Old Testament and the New Testament.

The total number of books in the Bible is:

  The Old Testament has …
  The New Testament has …


Q: Is the "Old Testament" the same thing as what the Bible calls "the Old Covenant"?

Q: Is the "New Testament" the same thing as what the Bible calls "the New Covenant"?

## Answers:

* The Old Testament is …
* The old covenant is …
* The New Testament is …
* The new covenant is …


# B. What are the Main Sets of Books in the Old Testament?

The books of the Old Testament fall into four natural sets, four natural groupings:

- The Pentateuch,
- the Historical Books,
- the Wisdom Books,
- and the Prophets.

1. The Pentateuch / the Books of Moses: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, & Deuteronomy

   We will provide a brief summary of the Pentateuch in H/O #06.

2. The Historical Books:

   The OT historical books fall into two main groups:

     1. The books that tell the history of God working with and through Israel before the exile:

        Joshua, Judges, & Ruth, 1 & 2 Samuel, 1 & 2 Kings.

     2. The books that review that history up until the exile, and then continue that history after the exile.

        1 & 2 Chronicles, and then Ezra & Nehemiah, and Esther.

3. The Wisdom Books: (sometimes called the “Poetic Books”)

   The OT wisdom books give us wisdom for living. Many of the psalms were written by … Two wisdom books, Proverbs & Ecclesiastes, are associated with … The five wisdom / poetic books are:

   - Job
   - Psalms
   - Proverbs
   - Ecclesiastes
   - Song of Songs (also called 'Song of Solomon')

4. The Prophets / the Prophetic Books:

   There are total of 16 books of the prophets in the Old Testament.

   The prophets are commonly divided into the major prophets, and the minor prophets.

   There are three major prophets (Isaiah, Jeremiah, & Ezekiel) and 12 minor prophets. Jews sometimes refer to the minor prophets as …

   The major prophets are simply much longer than the minor prophets.

     * The major prophets are each approx… .
     * The minor prophets, on average, are about …
     * All of the minor prophets taken together add up to be about the length of one major prophet.

   There is one prophetic book that is in a category by itself:

   Daniel is not one of the major prophets, and Jews do not include it with “the Twelve.”

   The three major prophets are (Isaiah, Jeremiah, & Ezekiel) are in the order that they fall into chronologically.

   [The book of Lamentations is associated with … . ]

   The twelve minor prophets naturally divide into three groups:

     1. The books that take place during the …

        Joel; Hosea, Amos, & Micah; Jonah // Obadiah (?)

     2. The books that take place during the …

         Nahum, Habakkuk, & Zephaniah // Obadiah (??)

     3. The books that take place after the …

        Haggai & Zechariah; Malachi.

   There is broad agreement that the last historical book written was:

   There is also broad agreement that the last prophetic book written was:

   They were both written around 450 BC. The period of time from after them until when Jesus comes is often called “the 400 silent years.” It is also called “the inter-testamental period.” It ends when people recognize that John the Baptist is a prophet.

