H/O #06
A Brief Introduction to & Overview of the Pentateuch

# A. The Titles & Labels for the Pentateuch:

The common NT label for the Pentateuch & esp. the "law of Moses" is simply …
[Greek: νοµος, nomos.]

The common OT label is …
[Hebrew: תורה tōrah ]. “Torah” means “teaching.” Jews view the laws as the teaching that God gave Israel through Moses. This is how Jews and Jewish scholars commonly refer to the five books of Moses.

 [However, “the torah of Moses” is still usually translated "the law of Moses" in English Bibles in the Old Testament so that it will read the same way the New Testament reads. Josh 8:31,32; 1 Kgs 2:3; 2 Kgs 4:6, etc.]

Both terms, torah and law, make sense, because …

The Pentateuch is also called "the five books of Moses" because Moses is viewed as their primary author.

The Hebrew Bible views these five books as a set. This is reflected in “scribal notes” that are at the end of the book of Deuteronomy.

# B. A Basic Observation about the Pentateuch:

 The Pentateuch is … .

# C. The Major Developments / Events in the Pentateuch:

## Genesis: The Pentateuch tells the story of creation and the fall.

The flood, and the preservation of the race through Noah.

The confusing of languages and the subsequent scattering of the nations at the tower of Babel.

Then, God called one family / nation (Abraham) through which …

The covenant with Abraham & his offspring.

The patriarchs: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Jacob's name is changed to … Jacob & his family (the Israelites) wound up down in Egypt.

## Exodus: God brought them out with great power.

Israel has a dramatic encounter with God at Mt. Sinai.

The nation of Israel enters into a covenant with God at Mt. Sinai = _____________________ . The 'Law' is the stipulations of this covenant. // They build ark of the covenant.

## Leviticus: Israel receives the laws which govern …

## Numbers: Israel spied out the land.

 But the Israelites do not believe God to enter the land, and voted not to go in.

 As a consequence, God decrees that they will …

 The older unbelieving generation gradually dies off over 40 years by the end of the book of Numbers.

## Deuteronomy: Eventually, God leads the younger generation to the plains of Moab, just east of the Jordan river. That is where the book of Deuteronomy takes place. Moses gives speeches, reminders, and exhortations to the generation that is about the cross the Jordan to enter the promised land. That is where the Pentateuch concludes.

