H/O #22 – The Book of Psalms

# I. The Background We Need to Know to Understand the Book of Psalms

There are three areas of background information that are very helpful for understanding the book of Psalms:
# A. The main outlines of the history of Israel.
# B. The life of David, in particular.
# C. The three covenants: covenant with Abraham, the Sinai covenant, and the covenant with David.

This section will summarize what the book of psalms assumes the reader knows from those three areas. It will also list some of the psalms that refer to these events and covenants.

# A. The Main Outlines of the History of Israel

We have seen all of these before in H/O #03, H/O #O4, and H/O #07. Here we are repeating the ones which are particularly important for reading the Psalms, because the Psalms refer to them.

 * Moses & the exodus from Egypt. Ps 105:38.

 * Israel received the Law and entered into a covenant with God at Mt Sinai (Exod 24). Ps 1:2; Ps 10:5; Ps 19:7; Ps 50:16; Ps 78:5,10,56; Ps 89:30; Ps 147:119,20.

 * Israel spied out the land, but did not trust God, and was afraid to enter the land (Num 13, 14). Ps 106:24-27.

 * So God decreed that Israel would wander in the wilderness for 40 years, until the generation which did not believe him all died off (Num 14; Num 26:6-65; Deut 1 & 2; Josh 5:4-7).

 * That same generation committed idolatry with the Baal of Peor (Num 25). Ps 106:28-31.

 * When the 40 years was done, Joshua led them into the land, as God drove out the nations from before Israel (the book of Joshua). Ps 44:1-8; 105:44.

 * But after Joshua died, Israel failed to continue to drive out the nations. Israel began to be influenced by their pagan customs (in the time of the Judges). Ps 106:34-36.

 * After that, when Israel had kings, some of Israel's kings were good. But several of Israel's kings were evil; some even worshipped the gods of Canaan. Israel was unfaithful to the Lord, and broke the covenant. Ps 106:37-39.

 * As a result, God brought severe judgment upon Israel. First the northern kingdom fell (in 722 BC). Then Judah fell to the Babylonians; Jerusalem & the temple were destroyed in 586 BC, and Judah went into exile. Ps 74; Ps 79; Ps 106:40-42.

 * But after 70 years, God brought the Jews back to Judah and Jerusalem. Ps 107; Ps 126; Ps 137; Ps 147.

# B. The Main Events in David's Life

These are the events in David's life which various psalms refer to:

 * David is chosen and anointed by God to be king. Ps 78:71; Ps 89:20.

 * Saul persecutes David, and tries to kill him. See the superscriptions to Ps 52, 54, 57, & 59.

 * David becomes king; he brings the ark of the covenant into Jerusalem. Ps 24; Ps 132:8.

 * God promises David that a son of his will reign on his throne forever (= the Davidic covenant). Ps 89:3-4, 19-29, 34-37; Ps 132.

 * David's sin with Bathsheba; David's confession. Ps 51; Ps 32.

 * The rebellion of David's son Absalom. Ps 3 (and perhaps Ps 42 & 43).

# C. The Three Covenants: Abraham, Sinai, and David

The psalms assume the reader is generally familiar with these three covenants. We have already mentioned them in H/O #09. We list them here simply for review.

 * God promised Abraham that He would bless him, make him into a great nation, and would bless all nations of the earth through Abraham and his seed.
 Ps 105:8-9,42; Ps 106:44-46; probably also Ps 47:9, Ps 74:20, and Ps 87.

 * Israel received the Law and entered into a covenant with God at Mt Sinai (Exod 24). Ps 1:2; Ps 10:5; Ps 19:7; Ps 50:16; Ps 78:5,10,56; Ps 89:30; Ps 147:119,20.

 * God promised David that a son of his will reign on his throne forever (= the Davidic covenant). Ps 89:3-4, 19-29, 34-37; Ps 132.

You will find that, as you read the Psalms, many of them will make more sense to you if you are familiar with events and covenants listed above.


I# I. Some Insights that Will Help Us Understand the Book of Psalms

# A. The Psalms are all written in Hebrew Poetry.

We looked at the nature of Hebrew poetry in H/O #16. Here we will just review a few items:

 * The lines in OT poetry usually come in pairs; this feature is called: ________________ . What’s the point?

 * The language is often _________________ and is not meant to be taken flatly literally.

 * Sometimes, one poem or one psalm will only tell us …

 * Sometimes, instead of telling us the facts of the matter, poetry will tell us …


# B. It is Helpful to Identify: Who is the Speaker in a Psalm?

The "Speaker" versus the "Psalmist"
 The term, “the psalmist” refers to the person who wrote the psalm (David, Asaph, the sons of Korah, etc.) The 'speaker' in a psalm is usually the same as the psalmist, but not always.
 When we read the psalms, we find that the 'speaker' can shift within a given psalm (from singular to plural, from a human to God, etc.).

 For example, in Psalm 46, the 'psalmist' is "the sons of Korah," the 'speaker' is plural, and could be them, or perhaps even the nation. But in v. 10, the speaker is clearly God; then in v. 11, the speaker shifts back to plural, the people / the nation / the godly. This distinction between the 'psalmist' and the 'speaker' will be especially important in psalms like Psalm 89 and 91.

# C. It is Helpful to Identify: Who is the Psalm Speaking about?

1. Psalms which sound like they are about David, but which describe events beyond anything David ever experienced.
There are psalms that are by David, and which speak in the 1st-person, as if it were David describing something about himself / his own experience. But in some of these psalms, the psalm describes things that go beyond anything David ever experienced. Two examples are Psalm 16 and Psalm 22. In such cases, interpreters have concluded that David is not talking about himself, but is talking about the Messiah. See Psalm 16 and Acts 2:24–32.

2. When the Pearson Being Referred to in a Psalm is Not Clear
Usually, who or what a psalm is talking about is obvious. But sometimes the person that a psalm is referring to might not be clear. A psalm can sometimes move from talking about one person to another very smoothly = without signaling to the reader that it has done so. In these cases it can be hard to identify who the psalm is talking about.

Most often the question is: Is the psalm talking about David, or about a future Davidic king? For example, consider Psalm 8:

In Psalm 8, does the phrase "the son of man" refer to all human beings, or to the Son of Man? When Psalm 8 is read in the context of the Old Testament, it easily & naturally seems to be referring to human beings, in general. But Hebrews 2 picks up on those words, and applies them to Jesus as the Son of God, in a unique way. Can the words in Psalm 8 refer to both? That is, can they reasonably apply to both?

Further, within the same psalm, there will sometimes be verses that seem to be speaking about the Messiah, and yet others which cannot be speaking about the Messiah, but nothing has signaled this shift to the reader. Consider Psalm 41:

The NT (Heb 10:5–7) quotes parts of Psalm 41 (vv. 6–8) and tells us that they are about the Messiah. But other parts of Psalm 41 cannot be about the Messiah, because they confess the speaker's many sins! (v. 4).

So the person that the psalm is speaking about can shift without the psalm telling us it has done so. Identifying who the psalm is talking about is very important. [Two examples: this is especially important in Psalm 89 and 91.]


II# I. The Five-Book Structure of the Book of Psalms

# A. Question: Is there an overall structure, or an overall flow, to the book of Psalms?

For centuries, interpreters have said no, there is no overall structure, no overall flow, to the book of Psalms. If that is the case, then it does not matter what order we read them in.

But in recent years (since about 1970), interpreters have paid more attention to the fact that the book of Psalms is divided into five "books." Many modern Bibles indicate this. See in your Bibles just above Ps 1, Ps 42, Ps 73, Ps 90 and Ps 107. The five books are:

Book I Psalms 1 – 41
Book II Psalms 42 – 72
Book III Psalms 73 – 89
Book IV Psalms 90 – 106
Book V Psalms 107 – 150

The five books are not balanced: they do not have the same number of psalms in them; and they are not same approximate length, either. [Book V has 44 psalms in it; Book III has only 17. In a typical printed Bible, Book I is about 40 pages long; Book III is less than 20.]

This raises the question: If the five books do not divide the book of Psalms into either equal numbers of psalms, or into sets that are roughly the same length, then why are those book-divisions there?

So interpreters have re-read the book of Psalms in the last 50 years, and have paid attention to the fivebook structure. They have found that there is a perceptible overall flow to the book of Psalms.

# B. The General Nature of the Overall Flow of the Book of Psalms:

As modern interpreters have re-read the book of Psalms, they have found that there is an overall chronological flow to it.

Clarification #1: When we say this, we do not mean that Ps 1 was the earliest psalm written, and that Ps 150 was the last psalm written. And we do not mean that the psalms flow in a precise chronological sequence from one psalm to the next.

What we mean is that → there is a general chronological sequence from one book of the Psalms to the next book. In brief, here is the overall flow:

Books I & II Before the exile. Books I & II mainly reflect and address David's life, and David's time as king. They reflect the setting before the exile.

Book III
 Early in the Exile. Book III has psalms that reflect and address the destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple (in 586 BC, by the Babylonians). Book III feels like it is
wrestling the implications of all of this while the ruins of Jerusalem are still smoldering, while it is still early in the exile.
Book IV
 Late in the Exile. Book IV has a few psalms which suggest the end of the exile is near, and that Jerusalem will be rebuilt soon.
Book V After the Exile. Book V reflects the situation after the exile. It has some psalms (at least: 107, 126, 137, & 147) that were written after the exile, when the Jews have returned to Judah & Jerusalem.

Clarification #2: We have said that <there is a general chronological sequence from one book of the Psalms to the next book>. But when we say that, we do not mean that all of the psalms in Book III were written during the exile, or that all of the psalms in Book V were written after the exile.

 Rather, some of the psalms in Book III were written during the exile, and the other psalms in Book III were put there to address the issues raised by the destruction of Jerusalem and the onset of the exile.

# C. The Chronological Flow of the Five Books Suggests an Overall Thematic Development:

The overall flow of the book of Psalms is not simply chronological. There is also a thematic development from one book to the next.

In Books I & II, the overall mood is positive. Many of the psalms in Books I & II are positive. But it is also true that there are many 'lament' psalms in Books I & I# I.

[ "Lament psalms'" – are psalms which basically complain to God about something. But they do not simply complain about life's normal irritations. Rather, they complain about something that is not right morally, something that is unjust. Lament psalms cry out to God to do something about it. They call on God to act in a manner that is consistent with his justice. Lament psalms fully assume the justice and righteousness of God. In the end, they trust God, and they leave the matter with God.]

Again, there are several lament psalms in Books I & II (for example: Psalms 3–7, and 10–13).
However, all of the lament psalms in Books I & II end on a positive note; they end with confidence that God will do something about it. In specific, Book II ends with Ps 72, a psalm which portrays the Davidic king ruling over the whole earth with justice and righteousness. So Books I & II end on a very positive note: all is well with the Davidic kingdom.

Book III – This positive mood changes as of Book II# I. Book III has the first psalms which address the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple (Ps 74, Ps 79). This was the most traumatic event in Israel's entire history during the Old Testament. It was unthinkable to many Israelites that the temple of God could actually be destroyed. In addition, there was no longer a Davidic king reigning over Israel. As a consequence, some Israelites wondered if God had abandoned them.

So Book III has lament psalms which actually end on a negative, unconfident note (Ps 88, Ps 89). Book III questions whether God will be true to the things He has promised. If Books I & II end with a confident assertion that all will be well, and that David's kingdom will rule the entire earth, Book III asks, "Really?"

Book III asks painful questions which it does not answer, which it leaves hanging.
[See: Psalm 74:1,9,10,20; 77:7-9; 79:5,8,9; 80:3,4,7,14,19; 85:4,5,6,7; and 89:46.]

Book IV – reassures the reader that God truly does reign (Psalms 93-99). And it answers the questions that Book III leaves hanging. Among them:

Book III asks: / Book IV answers:

Q: Has God's steadfast love failed forever? (Ps 77:8)
A: No, his steadfast love endures forever to those who fear, who revere him (Ps 103).

Q: Why does your anger (= God's anger) burn against the sheep of your pasture? (Ps 74:1).
 Why did all of this happen to us?
A: It is because we have sinned, just like our fathers did; we have done wrong, and acted wickedly (Ps 106:6).
 Ps 106 is the only national prayer of confession in the entire book of Psalms; there is no other psalm like it. And it is the very last psalm in Book IV. So Book IV ends with Israel confessing its sin, which was a spiritual requirement for them to be returned to the land (see: Lev ch. 26, esp. 26:40-45).

Q: Where is your great steadfast love, which You promised to David? (Ps 89:49)
A: Ps 91 & Ps 92 describe someone whom God will rescue (Ps 91:14-16), and who will see the defeat of his wicked enemies (Ps 92:9-11). Ps 102 tells us God will have compassion on Zion ( = David's palace, from which he ruled; Ps 102:13). And in Ps 103, David himself declares that God's steadfast love indeed endures forever for those who fear / revere God.

So Book IV answers the questions that were left hanging in Book II# I.

And then at least two psalms in Book IV anticipate that Jerusalem will be rebuilt (Ps 102:13-17), and that God will gather the Israelites from the nations, and bring them back (Ps 106:47). So Book IV anticipates the end of the exile.

Book V – has psalms that look back on the exile as something that is over (at least: 107, 126, 137, & 147). Psalms 120-134 are the "Psalms of Ascents," psalms that were sung as people travelled to Jerusalem. It makes very good sense that they are in Book V.

However, Israel's return to Judah & Jerusalem does not entirely satisfy the kingdom language of Book V. Psalm 119 speaks of the Law being in the heart, which is fulfilled under the new covenant. Psalm 145 envisions the kingdom of God ruling forever, which has certainly not occurred by the end of the Old Testament.

And what is more, Book V seems to anticipate further conflict yet to come (Ps 137-144). Nonetheless, Book V affirms that the steadfast love of God endures forever (Ps 136). In the end, God will ultimately win: those who have revered & served God will be delivered. The wicked will be judged and defeated. God's righteous kingdom will be established and will endure forever (Ps 145). God's Son = David's son = the anointed One, will rule over it forever (Ps 132).

# D. Summary of the Five-Book Structure of the Psalms:

When we look carefully at the five 'books' of the books of Psalms, we see that there is an overall flow to the book of Psalms. That overall flow is chronological (that is: the book-by-book flow in the Psalms is chronological, but not psalm-by-psalm). It moves from the time before the exile (Books I & II), to early in the exile (Book III), to late in the exile (Book IV), to after the exile (Book V).

And that overall chronological flow suggests a thematic development: The book of Psalms, as a book, wrestles the question: What to make of the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple? In Book III it asks: Why did this happen? Has God's steadfast love failed? Have the promises to David failed?

Books IV explains that Jerusalem and the temple were destroyed, not(!) because God had forgotten to be faithful, but because Israel had not been faithful to God. And Book IV and Book V assure the reader that God's promises to David and to the people of God will come true, that the faithful will be rescued, and that God's kingdom will be established and will indeed endure forever.


IV. Some Psalms that Are Especially Important

All of the psalms are valuable. Here are 12 that are especially important.

Psalm 1 The fate of the righteous versus the wicked


Psalm 2 The Anointed Son


Psalm 16 David foresees the …


Psalm 22 The physical suffering of …


[Ps 15 is similar to Ps 24.]
Psalm 24 The qualities need to dwell with God

 ↑ ↓
Psalm 25 So what are the rest of us going to do?


Psalm 37 Observe(!) the outcome of the lives of the righteous …
[Ps 73 is similar to Ps 37]

Psalm 51 David’s confession of Sin


Psalm 72 The righteous Davidic King ruling over the world


Psalm 87 This one was born in ____________ . But was he?


Psalm 103 The mercy & steadfast love of God is …


Psalm 110 The Lord said to my Lord … .


For your personal reflection:

 * Who is the speaker in Psalm 89? (not the psalmist, the speaker)

 * Whom is Psalm 91 talking about?

