
### Isaiah 9 & 11

A son in the line of David will rule upon David's throne forever.

### Isaiah 19:19-25

Egypt and Assyria (!) will be blessed along with Israel (esp. v. 25).

### Isaiah 42:1-7

The Servant of Yahweh → will be a covenant _for_ the people, a light to the Gentiles.

   ```
   See similarly Isaiah 49:6; also 55:4-5 ← the context here is Davidic.
   ```

### Isaiah 52:13-53

The Righteous Servant who suffers for transgressors and who is consequently lifted up and highly exalted.

### Isaiah 56:3-8

Foreigners who serve and love Yahweh will be accepted. They will come to his temple and offer sacrifice which Yahweh will accept. [See similarly Isa. 14:1-2.]

### Jeremiah 4:1-4

Yahweh looks at the heart. Those of Judah & Jerusalem must circumcise their + 17:9–10 hearts, or Yahweh's wrath will break out against them.
 The Point:

### Jeremiah 9:25-26

Yahweh will someday punish all those who are only __.

### Jeremiah 12:14-17

God speaks of His judgment upon, but then the future restoration of, the nations.

### Jeremiah 31:31-34

The New Covenant. Its two main provisions:

1. __
2. __

### Jeremiah 31:35-37

There will be a __ as long as the present order of creation continues.

### Jeremiah 33:14-26

The 3 Covenants of Promise In the context of the New Covenant, we are told:

* The covenant with David …
* God will never completely destroy …
* A son of / David …

### Daniel 5

Records the fall of Babylon to the Persians (539 BC); the “writing on the wall.”

### Ezekiel 1-11

The glory of God departs the Temple.

That glory was part of which covenant? __ .

This is what Ezekiel's vision of a "wheel in a wheel" represents - see 1:4-28. But what is the point of the vision?

### Ezekiel 34–37, in general.

- 34:20-31 "David" will be the prince over the flock (vv. 22-24); there will be a covenant of peace (v. 25).

- 36:22-32 This passage is the OT backdrop for the NT passage:

   ```
   Ezek. 11:16–21 is similar.
   ```

- 37:24-28 Again, David will be King over them in the land Yahweh gave to Jacob forever;

   Also, they will …

### Ezekiel 47:21-23

This passage is the OT background for what NT passage?

In a vision of the restored temple & land, aliens who settle within Israel are to be:

* Considered (v. 22) as …
* They are to be given an inheritance …

!! Gentiles are viewed as Israelites, will dwell with Israelites, and receive an inheritance in "Israel's" land.

The idea that God-fearing Gentiles will be fellow-heirs with believing Israel does not(!) originate in the New Testament; it is anchored in the Old Testament.

### Amos 9:11

### Micah 6:6-8, esp. v. 8 .

### Micah 7:18-20

God will be true to the mercy he pledged to __ in days long ago.

### Zechariah 2:10-13

> "Many nations will be joined with the Lord in that day, and will become my people."

### Zechariah 6:9-15

A vision of a priestly king who will build Yahweh's temple and rule on the throne.

What does this call to mind?

###  Zechariah 8; esp. 20-23

Ten men will implore one Jew to let them go with him, because they have heard that God is with them (= the Jews).

### Zechariah 9:9

> "Behold, your king comes to you … riding on a donkey … on the foal of a donkey."

### Zechariah 12:10

> "They will look on me, whom they have pierced … ."

### Malachi 3:16-17

Yahweh's treasured possession will consist of __ .

```
Recall the phrase "treasured possession" from Exodus 19:5 & Deuteronomy 7:6.
```
